# Re-analysing the data from Moffatt et al. (2020): A textbook illustration of the fallacy of the null hypothesis

## Abstract

Moffatt et al. (2020) reported the results of an experiment (N = 26 in the final sample) comparing the facial (surface) electromyographic correlates of mental rumination and distraction, following an experimentally induced stressor. Based on the absence of significant difference in the perioral muscular activity between the rumination and distraction conditions, Moffatt et al. (2020) concluded that (the *self-reported*) inner experience was unrelated to peripheral muscular activity as assessed using surface electromyography. We suggest this conclusion is hasty and based on waggly evidence. Indeed, concluding on the absence of an effect based on a low-powered statistical test is strongly problematic/uninformative. Moreover, the relation between self-reports and physiological measures was not *directly* assessed, but only indirectly inferred from differences (or absence thereof) in group means. Given the ample inter-individual variability in these measures (as suggested through our reanalysis), we think inferring the individual-level relation between self-reports and physiological measures from group means is inappropriate. Given these limitations, we conclude that it is unclear whether the target article adds to the current/extent knowledge and we suggest ways forward, both from a theoretical and from a methodological perspective. Complete source code, reproducible analyses, and figures are available at https://github.com/lnalborczyk/inner_experience_EMG.
